CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

First off, thank you for considering contributing to *vertica-sql-go* and helping make it even better than it is today!

This document will guide you through the contribution process. There are a number of ways you can help:

 - [Bug Reports](#bug-reports)
 - [Feature Requests](#feature-requests)
 - [Code Contributions](#code-contributions)
 
# Bug Reports

If you find a bug, submit an [issue](https://github.com/vertica/vertica-sql-go/issues) with a complete and reproducible bug report. If the issue can't be reproduced, it will be closed. If you opened an issue, but figured out the answer later on your own, comment on the issue to let people know, then close the issue.

For issues (e.g. security related issues) that are **not suitable** to be reported publicly on the GitHub issue system, report your issues to [Vertica team](mailto:vertica-opensrc@microfocus.com) directly or file a case with Vertica support if you have a support account.

# Feature Requests

Feel free to share your ideas for how to improve *vertica-sql-go*. We’re always open to suggestions.
You can open an [issue](https://github.com/vertica/vertica-sql-go/issues)
with details describing what feature(s) you'd like added or changed.

If you would like to implement the feature yourself, open an issue to ask before working on it. Once approved, please refer to the [Code Contributions](#code-contributions) section.

# Code Contributions

## Configure Git for the first time

Make sure git knows your [name](https://help.github.com/articles/setting-your-username-in-git/ "Set commit username in Git") and [email address](https://help.github.com/articles/setting-your-commit-email-address-in-git/ "Set commit email address in Git"):

```shell
git config --global user.name "John Smith"
git config --global user.email "email@example.com"
```

## Step 1: Fork

Fork the project [on Github](https://github.com/vertica/vertica-sql-go) and check out your copy locally.

```shell
git clone git@github.com:YOURUSERNAME/vertica-sql-go.git
cd vertica-sql-go
```

Your GitHub repository **YOURUSERNAME/vertica-sql-go** will be called "origin" in
Git. You should also setup **vertica/vertica-sql-go** as an "upstream" remote.

```shell
git remote add upstream git@github.com:vertica/vertica-sql-go.git
git fetch upstream
```

**NOTE:** If you are new to Go development and forking, here is an excellent blog post to read on managing import paths when forking: 
http://code.openark.org/blog/development/forking-golang-repositories-on-github-and-managing-the-import-path


## Step 2: Branch

Create a new branch for the work with a descriptive name:

```shell
git checkout -b my-fix-branch
```

## Step 3: Get the driver test running

*vertica-sql-go* comes with a driver test of its own, in the root directory of the code base. It’s our policy to make sure all tests pass at all times.

We appreciate any and all [contributions to the tests](#tests)! These tests are built within the standard Go testing framework. You might want to check out the Go documentation for more details.

The test is built around the standard Go test framework. From the source directory simply run:

```sh
go test <args>
```
were args are one of the following:

| Query Argument | Description | Values |
|----------------|-------------|--------|
| use_prepared_statements    | whether to use client-side query interpolation or server-side argument binding | true = (default) use server-side bindings |
|                |             | false = user client side interpolation |
| tlsmode            | the ssl policy for this connection | 'none' (default) = don't use SSL for this connection |
|                |                                    | 'server' = server must support SSL, but skip verification (INSECURE!) |
|                |                                    | 'server-strict' = server must support SSL |
| locator        | host and port of the Vertica connection | (default) localhost:5433
| user           | Vertica user ID | (default) the userid of the running user |
| password       | Vertica password for the connecting user | (default) (empty)
|

**NOTE:** Since it's often a bad idea to put your password on the command line, you can set the VERTICA_TEST_PASSWORD environment variable. Even if environment variable is set, the "--password" flag will supercede it.

For example:

```shell script
export VERTICA_TEST_PASSWORD=mypassword
go test --locator hostname:5433 --user rhuebner --tlsmode server
```
You should run the test suite under multiple configurations (local interpolation vs. prepared statements, SSL vs plain, etc.)

For example:

```shell script
export VERTICA_TEST_PASSWORD=mypassword

# Against a plain connection.
go test --locator hostname:5433 --user rhuebner --tlsmode none --use_prepared_statements true
go test --locator hostname:5433 --user rhuebner --tlsmode none --use_prepared_statements false

# Against an SSL-enabled server.
go test --locator hostname:5433 --user rhuebner --tlsmode server --use_prepared_statements true
go test --locator hostname:5433 --user rhuebner --tlsmode server --use_prepared_statements false
```

The Travis CI configuration committed as part of the project will automatically run through several combinations of parameters.
These CI tests must pass before any PR will be considered.

## Step 4: Implement your fix or feature

At this point, you're ready to make your changes! Feel free to ask for help; everyone is a beginner at first.

### License Headers

Every file in this project must use the following Apache 2.0 header (with the appropriate year or years in the "[yyyy]" box; if a copyright statement from another party is already present in the code, you may add the statement on top of the existing copyright statement):

```
Copyright (c) [yyyy] Micro Focus or one of its affiliates.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
```

### Commits

Make some changes on your branch, then stage and commit as often as necessary:

```shell
git add .
git commit -m 'Added two more tests for #166'
```

When writing the commit message, try to describe precisely what the commit does. The commit message should be in lines of 72 chars maximum. Include the issue number `#N`, if the commit is related to an issue.

### Tests

Add appropriate tests for the bug’s or feature's behavior, run the test suite again and ensure that all tests pass. Here is the guideline for writing test:
 - Tests should be easy for any contributor to run. Contributors may not get complete access to their Vertica database, for example, they may only have a non-admin user with write privileges to a single schema, and the database may not be the latest version. We encourage tests to use only what they need and nothing more.
 - If there are requirements to the database for running a test, the test should adapt to different situations and never report a failure. For example, if a test depends on a multi-node database, it should check the number of DB nodes first, and skip itself when it connects to a single-node database.

## Step 5: Push and Rebase

You can publish your work on GitHub just by doing:

```shell
git push origin my-fix-branch
```

When you go to your GitHub page, you will notice commits made on your local branch is pushed to the remote repository.

When upstream (vertica/vertica-sql-go) has changed, you should rebase your work. The **rebase** command creates a linear history by moving your local commits onto the tip of the upstream commits.

You can rebase your branch locally and force-push to your GitHub repository by doing:

```shell
git checkout my-fix-branch
git fetch upstream
git rebase upstream/master
git push -f origin my-fix-branch
```


## Step 6: Make a Pull Request

When you think your work is ready to be pulled into *vertica-sql-go*, you should create a pull request(PR) at GitHub.

A good pull request means:
 - commits with one logical change in each
 - well-formed messages for each commit
 - documentation and tests, if needed

Go to https://github.com/YOURUSERNAME/verticasql-go and [make a Pull Request](https://help.github.com/articles/creating-a-pull-request/) to `vertica:master`. 

### Sign the CLA
Before we can accept a pull request, we first ask people to sign a Contributor License Agreement (or CLA). We ask this so that we know that contributors have the right to donate the code. You should notice a comment from **CLAassistant** on your pull request page, follow this comment to sign the CLA electronically. 

### Review
Pull requests are usually reviewed within a few days. If there are comments to address, apply your changes in new commits, rebase your branch and force-push to the same branch, re-run the test suite to ensure tests are still passing. We care about quality, Vertica has internal test suites to run as well, so your pull request won't be merged until all internal tests pass. In order to produce a clean commit history, our maintainers would do squash merging once your PR is approved, which means combining all commits of your PR into a single commit in the master branch.

That's it! Thank you for your code contribution!

After your pull request is merged, you can safely delete your branch and pull the changes from the upstream repository.

Commit message:

Migrate CI from Travis CI to GitHub Actions (#105)

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

First off, thank you for considering contributing to *vertica-sql-go* and helping make it even better than it is today!

This document will guide you through the contribution process. There are a number of ways you can help:

 - [Bug Reports](#bug-reports)
 - [Feature Requests](#feature-requests)
 - [Code Contributions](#code-contributions)
 
# Bug Reports

If you find a bug, submit an [issue](https://github.com/vertica/vertica-sql-go/issues) with a complete and reproducible bug report. If the issue can't be reproduced, it will be closed. If you opened an issue, but figured out the answer later on your own, comment on the issue to let people know, then close the issue.

For issues (e.g. security related issues) that are **not suitable** to be reported publicly on the GitHub issue system, report your issues to [Vertica team](mailto:vertica-opensrc@microfocus.com) directly or file a case with Vertica support if you have a support account.

# Feature Requests

Feel free to share your ideas for how to improve *vertica-sql-go*. We’re always open to suggestions.
You can open an [issue](https://github.com/vertica/vertica-sql-go/issues)
with details describing what feature(s) you'd like added or changed.

If you would like to implement the feature yourself, open an issue to ask before working on it. Once approved, please refer to the [Code Contributions](#code-contributions) section.

# Code Contributions

## Configure Git for the first time

Make sure git knows your [name](https://help.github.com/articles/setting-your-username-in-git/ "Set commit username in Git") and [email address](https://help.github.com/articles/setting-your-commit-email-address-in-git/ "Set commit email address in Git"):

```shell
git config --global user.name "John Smith"
git config --global user.email "email@example.com"
```

## Step 1: Fork

Fork the project [on Github](https://github.com/vertica/vertica-sql-go) and check out your copy locally.

```shell
git clone git@github.com:YOURUSERNAME/vertica-sql-go.git
cd vertica-sql-go
```

Your GitHub repository **YOURUSERNAME/vertica-sql-go** will be called "origin" in
Git. You should also setup **vertica/vertica-sql-go** as an "upstream" remote.

```shell
git remote add upstream git@github.com:vertica/vertica-sql-go.git
git fetch upstream
```

**NOTE:** If you are new to Go development and forking, here is an excellent blog post to read on managing import paths when forking: 
http://code.openark.org/blog/development/forking-golang-repositories-on-github-and-managing-the-import-path


## Step 2: Branch

Create a new branch for the work with a descriptive name:

```shell
git checkout -b my-fix-branch
```

## Step 3: Get the driver test running

*vertica-sql-go* comes with a driver test of its own, in the root directory of the code base. It’s our policy to make sure all tests pass at all times.

We appreciate any and all [contributions to the tests](#tests)! These tests are built within the standard Go testing framework. You might want to check out the Go documentation for more details.

The test is built around the standard Go test framework. From the source directory simply run:

```sh
go test <args>
```
were args are one of the following:

| Query Argument | Description | Values |
|----------------|-------------|--------|
| use_prepared_statements    | whether to use client-side query interpolation or server-side argument binding | true = (default) use server-side bindings |
|                |             | false = user client side interpolation |
| tlsmode            | the ssl policy for this connection | 'none' (default) = don't use SSL for this connection |
|                |                                    | 'server' = server must support SSL, but skip verification (INSECURE!) |
|                |                                    | 'server-strict' = server must support SSL |
| locator        | host and port of the Vertica connection | (default) localhost:5433
| user           | Vertica user ID | (default) the userid of the running user |
| password       | Vertica password for the connecting user | (default) (empty)
|

**NOTE:** Since it's often a bad idea to put your password on the command line, you can set the VERTICA_TEST_PASSWORD environment variable. Even if environment variable is set, the "--password" flag will supercede it.

For example:

```shell script
export VERTICA_TEST_PASSWORD=mypassword
go test --locator hostname:5433 --user rhuebner --tlsmode server
```
You should run the test suite under multiple configurations (local interpolation vs. prepared statements, SSL vs plain, etc.)

For example:

```shell script
export VERTICA_TEST_PASSWORD=mypassword

# Against a plain connection.
go test --locator hostname:5433 --user rhuebner --tlsmode none --use_prepared_statements true
go test --locator hostname:5433 --user rhuebner --tlsmode none --use_prepared_statements false

# Against an SSL-enabled server.
go test --locator hostname:5433 --user rhuebner --tlsmode server --use_prepared_statements true
go test --locator hostname:5433 --user rhuebner --tlsmode server --use_prepared_statements false
```

The Github Actions [CI workflow](.github/workflows/ci.yaml) committed as part of the project will automatically run through several combinations of parameters.
These CI tests must pass before any PR will be considered. This CI workflow can be run on your forked repository after you enabling Github Actions on your fork.

## Step 4: Implement your fix or feature

At this point, you're ready to make your changes! Feel free to ask for help; everyone is a beginner at first.

### License Headers

Every file in this project must use the following Apache 2.0 header (with the appropriate year or years in the "[yyyy]" box; if a copyright statement from another party is already present in the code, you may add the statement on top of the existing copyright statement):

```
Copyright (c) [yyyy] Micro Focus or one of its affiliates.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
```

### Commits

Make some changes on your branch, then stage and commit as often as necessary:

```shell
git add .
git commit -m 'Added two more tests for #166'
```

When writing the commit message, try to describe precisely what the commit does. The commit message should be in lines of 72 chars maximum. Include the issue number `#N`, if the commit is related to an issue.

### Tests

Add appropriate tests for the bug’s or feature's behavior, run the test suite again and ensure that all tests pass. Here is the guideline for writing test:
 - Tests should be easy for any contributor to run. Contributors may not get complete access to their Vertica database, for example, they may only have a non-admin user with write privileges to a single schema, and the database may not be the latest version. We encourage tests to use only what they need and nothing more.
 - If there are requirements to the database for running a test, the test should adapt to different situations and never report a failure. For example, if a test depends on a multi-node database, it should check the number of DB nodes first, and skip itself when it connects to a single-node database.

## Step 5: Push and Rebase

You can publish your work on GitHub just by doing:

```shell
git push origin my-fix-branch
```

When you go to your GitHub page, you will notice commits made on your local branch is pushed to the remote repository.

When upstream (vertica/vertica-sql-go) has changed, you should rebase your work. The **rebase** command creates a linear history by moving your local commits onto the tip of the upstream commits.

You can rebase your branch locally and force-push to your GitHub repository by doing:

```shell
git checkout my-fix-branch
git fetch upstream
git rebase upstream/master
git push -f origin my-fix-branch
```


## Step 6: Make a Pull Request

When you think your work is ready to be pulled into *vertica-sql-go*, you should create a pull request(PR) at GitHub.

A good pull request means:
 - commits with one logical change in each
 - well-formed messages for each commit
 - documentation and tests, if needed

Go to https://github.com/YOURUSERNAME/verticasql-go and [make a Pull Request](https://help.github.com/articles/creating-a-pull-request/) to `vertica:master`. 

### Sign the CLA
Before we can accept a pull request, we first ask people to sign a Contributor License Agreement (or CLA). We ask this so that we know that contributors have the right to donate the code. You should notice a comment from **CLAassistant** on your pull request page, follow this comment to sign the CLA electronically. 

### Review
Pull requests are usually reviewed within a few days. If there are comments to address, apply your changes in new commits, rebase your branch and force-push to the same branch, re-run the test suite to ensure tests are still passing. We care about quality, Vertica has internal test suites to run as well, so your pull request won't be merged until all internal tests pass. In order to produce a clean commit history, our maintainers would do squash merging once your PR is approved, which means combining all commits of your PR into a single commit in the master branch.

That's it! Thank you for your code contribution!

After your pull request is merged, you can safely delete your branch and pull the changes from the upstream repository.
